Is cancer a metabolic disease that can
be prevented by avoiding ultrarocessed
food? Welcome to Food Junkies podcast.
My name is Dr. Verit. I am your host
today speaking with oncology researcher
Dr. Thomas Seaffruit. Dr. Seaffruit is
an American professor of biology,
genetics, and biochemistry at Boston
College. He has dedicated his career to
studying chronic diseases such as
cancer, epilepsy, and neurodeenerative
disorders. Dr. Seafford got his PhD in
genetics and biochemistry from the
University of Illinois Urbana Champagne
in 1976 and completed a posttock
fellowship in neurology at Yo University
School of Medicine where he also served
as a assistant professor. His
publications include over 200
peer-reviewed articles and um a 2012
book cancer as metabolic disease. Dr.
Seafruit argues that cancer is primarily
a mitochondrial metabolic disease and
that metabolic therapies such as
ketogenic diets and caloric restriction
may be better ways to manage cancer
rather than traditional chemotherapies.
We at food junkies are particularly
interested in the role that sugar and
ultrarocessed food play in the
development of cancer. Oh, so welcome
Dr. Seaff.
>> Thank you very much fear. It's a real
pleasure to be here today. Thank you.
>> Thank you. What led you to challenge the
traditional genetic mutation theory of
cancer?
>> Have a degree in genetics and having
classes in human genetics where cancer
was always discussed in the light of a
genetic problem. We didn't ch I didn't
challenge that. I I just thought that's
the way it was. And everybody received
Nobel many people got Nobel prizes
received Nobel prizes for anko jeans and
this kind of stuff. And we you and when
you teach classes, you just regurgitate
what the textbooks tell us without
really delving into the situation. I
figured these guys must know what
they're doing. But when I did the we
worked in epilepsy for many years and we
were working on metabolic approaches to
managing epileptic seizures. But at the
same time, I we had a grant from the NIH
to study angioenesis in tumors. I I had
parallel programs going at the same
time. uh one was on the glyolippid
composition of of tumors, brain tumors
that we developed that I developed at
Yale University because we were
interested in glyolippid biochemistry
and then we were able to link glyolippid
biochemistry to controlling angiogenesis
which is the abnormal vascularization of
incipient tumors. So we had this
parallel program with in one side I was
using natural models of epilepsy and on
the other side I was using natural
models of cancer, brain cancer to be
specific and the two programs were
parallel but not at all overlapping
until we started to realize that calorie
restriction and ketogenic diets that
were managing epileptic seizures were
also managing cancer.
in a very profound way. It shut down the
angioenesis, reduced inflammation. It
was targeting all the pathways that were
linked to angioenesis and inflammation
in the tumor. At the same time, it was
reducing epileptic seizures in mice that
had epilepsy. So, the two parallel paths
started to cross. And I was surprised
about how powerful ketogenic diets were
to manage epileptic seizures. And when I
was at Yale, I did that's where I did a
lot of my work in epilepsy there. And
that was a big the center of epilepsy
research at Yale University at that time
in department of neurology. And I said,
I wonder if I should use this ketogenic
oh nobody's interest. They told me
forget it. Pass we nobody's interested.
I I wrote a grant up internally to Yale
to get money to do study uh ketogenic
diet for epilepsy management and they
said no. And everybody said that's a
waste of time. So I I didn't think much
of it and that was back in the early 80s
and then when I came here to BC we were
working on epilepsy but we're trying to
map genes for epilepsy wasn't really
doing much diet or any of this kind of
stuff but one of my students came to me
and said oh there's a big talk about ep
ketogenic diets for epilepsy out on the
west coast Jim Abrams a movie maker guy
who made the airplane movies and this
kind of thing his son Charlie had
epilepsy and was essentially cured using
ketogenic metabolic therapy ketogenic
diets and he had Meyer Street, the
famous actress, do a study, a movie,
First Do No Harm, and then all a big
group of people started to get excited
about ketogenic diets and epilepsy. Even
though Yale said, "No, it's I set up one
of the early um special workshops at the
American Epilepsy Society to bring more
attention to ketogenic diets and
epilepsy." And then we had Eric Kasoff
and a bunch of others from John Hopkins
and the late John Freeman. And we
started to collect more and more people
really excited about ketogenic diets for
for epilepsy and and we and then we
realized it was largely calorie
restriction. If you didn't restrict the
diet, you didn't get protection against
seizures. And we found the same thing in
the cancer. When the mice ate as much
ketogenic diet, tumors would go go wild.
But it was again calorie restriction and
it was restricted diets that bo that
worked both against seizures and against
cancer. the we still don't know the
mechanism by which ketogenic diets and
fasting work against cancer. It's
definitely linked to the levels of blood
sugar, but we're still confused about
what role ketone elevation of ketone
bodies basically beta hydroxybutyrate
have in managing epileptic seizures. And
it's a very exciting area and a lot of
people are writing grants trying to
figure this out. But when I look more
into the cancer problem, it became clear
to me that the linkage to what we were
seeing in cancer with calorie
restriction and ketogenic diet
restriction linked back to Otto
Warberg's work in cancer. And he was the
giant biochemist from from the 20th
century. And he clearly showed that
cancer was a metabolic problem and that
was inefficient in cancer cells leading
them to produce lactic acid as a waste
product of a fermentation metabolism. I
was seeing the same thing in my own work
and then I started to question what the
hell are they talking about with all
these gene mutations and everything
else. Yes. So it it became then I said
why and then we got into a big
discussion. Oh no the gene mutations
make the cancer cell ferment. And I
said, "Oh yeah, yeah. How how does that
work?
>> Let's just go back to what was the uh
traditional or semantic theory of
cancer? Tell us in simple terms how we
understood cancer, how how it's
different than healthy cells."
>> The person who was linked to the origin
of cancer as a genetic disease was this
German scientist called Theodore Bovery.
Bovery. Bovery was famous because he was
one of the first to link chromosomes to
mendle mandelian factors. When when
Gregor Mendel first did his work on pea
plants, there was no biology associated
with it. It was purely ratios of colored
leaves and petals and tall and short and
purple and green and all these kinds of
things. But he he had no clue what was
the biology for what he was seeing these
ratios. It was Theodore Bovery who
linked and Walter Sutton, a grad student
at Columbia. Those two guys were the
first ones to link Mendele's traits to
chromosomes. But at the same time,
Theodore Bovery was working on looking
at at tumor cells. And he said, "Oh,
looks like some of these tumor cells
have broken chromosomes, and maybe
that's responsible for the disregulated
growth, which is cancer. Cancer is
disregulated cell growth." So he
speculated in 1914
that tumors have broken chromosomes and
some abnormalities in the way they
chromosomes line up on the metaphase
plate and maybe that's responsible for
the disregulated growth. But he
apologizes. I'm just speculating here. I
have no clue. I never studied cancer,
know nothing about cancer and probably
everything that I'm saying is wrong and
it will come to light that I am wrong.
But he was embraced as the father of the
somatic mutation theory because when
Watson and Crick outlined that the
structure of DNA and DNA started to
explode as the genetic material the
structure of the genetic material itself
with strands of DNA and then soon after
it was recognized besides the
chromosomeal abnormalities some gene
mutations were found in in cancer cells
and the field like lemmings ran off the
cliff chasing genes. And then of course
it became more and more involved in how
many different kinds of genetic
abnormalities you could find in tumor
cells. And that persisted all through
the 1960s and early 70s. And Warberg's
idea he was the giant in the field of
cancer. and he wrote a profound summary
of the field in in 1956
and uh was attacked uh by several people
who made assumptions now since cleared
up were all incorrect. Both Warberg and
those attacking him uh were all fighting
over things that were shown to be
inaccurate. But the field dumped him uh
and ran off chasing genes and then
awards were Nobel awards were given to
individuals that found tumor suppressor
genes, anko genes and these kinds of
things. And then this justified the
establishment of the cancer genome
atlas, which was a multi-million dollar
investment by the National Institutes of
Health into a huge comprehensive
analysis of a sequencing database of all
major cancers that we know of. The
breast cancer project, the brain cancer
project, the lung cancer, the pancreatic
cancer. So they all had these massive
investment in deep sequencing and what
developed from that were the
technologies that were exploding to
analyze the sequences of base pairs and
genes and thousands of genes
simultaneously. So the technology in the
field of molecular biology exploded
based on the investment in the cancer
genome genome atlas but it wasn't having
any significant impact on reducing the
death rate. more and more studies came
out. Uh people scratching their heads,
what's going on here? Every seems like
every cell in a tumor has a different
genetic profile. No two cells in any
tumor have the same kinds of mutations
or chromosomal abnormalities. So then
they stood back a little bit the field
and said, "Oh, not all these mutations
really play a role in disregulated cell
growth, but only some of them." And we
call them driver genes. So then the
field got all excited all over again and
they went on this big hunt for driver
genes leading to the production of
imunotherapies which are today
considered the state-of-the-art for
cancer management because we're going to
target the effect we're going to target
the effects of driver genes in cancer
cells using imunotherapies to
specifically precision medicine killing
these things and
>> is that essentially what chemotherapy is
>> chemotherapy is many different kinds.
Imunotherapy is targeting epitopes on
tumor cells, markers on tumor cells
created by mutations in the genome.
Chemotherapy was traditionally a toxic
chemical that would just stop cell
division and that's why you go bald and
your guts all screwed up and all kinds
of things because it was stopping the
division of any cell dividing. We have
cells in the gut that divide. We have
hair follicles that divide. We have a
lot of cells that divide naturally. But
chemo toxic chemo doc rubeson red death
and all they have these names for these
things doses of highdosese radiation we
have these poisonous chemicals they
block either DNA repair they block they
cause DNA mutation DNA damage they block
the cytokeleton they're extremely toxic
kinds of things and they were designed
to just stop cell proliferation because
cancer was cell division out of control
but that was too it was like carpet
bombing your whole body so precision
medicine came in based on the cancer
genome atlas where we're going to target
specific markers on the surface of
cancer cell. We're going to we're going
to we're going to take our immune cells
T- cells and and B cells and we're going
to train them to go after these tumor
cells and make it a lot more precision.
And that's why they call precision
medicine and it was based on the
development of imunotherapies all based
on the sematic mutation theory.
>> So how effective were they? And that's
what we see advertised every night on on
television. Opivvo Katruda. Oh, we have
your we have the specific uh treatment
for your specific cancer. And and this
is all part of the somatic mutation
theory. Just a a different branch so to
speak of the somatic mutation theory.
And and yet we look and every year the
American Cancer Society tells us how
many dead people we have. And right now,
the latest came out that we have 1,700
people a day dying from cancer, which
comes to about 70 people per hour.
>> And this doesn't go down. This goes up
up every year. What What are all those
supposedly precision medicine? What are
they doing? And and they tell you in no
uncertain terms on television in the
evening because they come out they don't
come out during during football or
basketball games. They come out when
older folks are watching the evening
news. Then you get bombarded with all
these cancer drugs and all this kind of
stuff. And they clearly say in the one
minute time frame of their commercial,
60% of that one minute is telling you
how this is going to kill you, how this
drug is going to kill you or make your
life miserable. All right. So I said,
"Wow, this is really amazing. People are
going to go out and take any kind of a
medication that has a remote possibility
of killing them. What are these? What
are people nuts? Why would anyone with
any moral fiber come on the TV and tell
you take something that has a a a chance
of killing you? And the idea, we looked
into this and it's called
hyperprogressive disease, which is where
the therapy itself will kill you before
the tumor does. It attacks your liver
because those same markers that are on
the tumor cells can also be on your
kidneys and liver and some other organ.
So when you're giving it to kill the
tumor cells, you blow your liver and
kidney out at the same time. You die
before the cancer kills you. It's called
hyperprogressive disease. Every
oncologist knows this. It's And they say
it. They don't call it hyper progressive
disease. They say this drug can kill
you.
So I said, "Whoa, this is this is really
interesting." And they're making
billions of dollars selling it to poor
people that that don't know what's going
on. Now, there are success stories,
don't get me wrong, because we have
success with toxic poisonous chemo and
we have success with imunotherapies. The
problem is we have a lot of failures and
tragedies. uh also associated with these
things. But but but in when you look
back at what Otto Warberg said and we
have confirmed now that Otto Warberg was
essentially correct and we have cleared
up a lot of the mess that was
misinformation and misunderstanding of
the biology. It is clear that we have
that all these tumors regardless of
where they come from, breast, colon,
brain, bladder, melanomas, blood
cancers, they are they're all
fermenting, which means they're using
their energy is being driven by non
oxygen process. They don't use oxygen.
So they're ferment. That's an ancient
way of generating energy. Energy without
oxygen. And all these cancers that we
study that we look at are all
fermenttors. So I said, what do they
ferment? what is their fuel to get
energy without oxygen and it comes to
the sugar glucose and the amino acid
glutamine and we interrogated all these
cells so we know what the hell others
other people they can't live without
glucose and glutamine and they can't
switch to fatty acids or ketone bodies
so we know that and that's the simplest
damn thing this cancer is not as
complicated as everybody made it out to
be it's only complicated when you have a
misunderstanding about the origin of
disease if it's a sematic mutation
disease like they say then it's a
hopelessly complicated But if it's a
mitochondrial metabolic disease, it's
embarrassingly simple.
>> Let's Okay, we've got the traditional
and how they were off on the wrong
hypothesis and now we're on to the newer
idea, your idea, which is the metabolic
hypothesis. Can you start with that
explaining what that is? And by the way,
fermenting that just means
carbohydrates, right? Or can
>> No, you No, you can ferment amino acids.
That was our big discovery.
>> You can use the amino acid amino acids
in our body. We have them circulating in
our bloodstream. the the most abundant
amino acid in in the human bloodstream
is glutamine. It's an amino acid and it
drives our it keeps our gut healthy. It
keeps our immune system healthy, our ura
cycle. We need glutamine. It's it's a
very abundant amino acid in our bodies.
>> Okay?
>> And the cancer cells need it uh as well.
So we know what the can that's a big
breakthrough that's not known by the
majority of people that I would say mo
what I'm telling you right now is not
known by the by 90% of oncologists no
matter what I'm saying right now is not
known by 90% of the people treating pe
others for cancer
>> but start at the basis of what you mean
by metabolic hypothesis
>> okay so so the issue here is we have
what is the disease it's called cancer
what is cancer cell division out of
control disregulated cell growth
>> what is causing the cells to be growing
out of control, no longer regulated. Is
it a mutation in the genome or is it
inefficiency of the ability of the cell
to generate energy through oxygen?
Because you're breathing, I'm breathing,
and if we if you and I did not breathe,
we would be dead. And the fastest way to
prove that is is take cyanide. If you
take cyanide right now and I take
cyanide right now, we would be both face
down in the computer right in front of
our we would be both dead in the same
amount of time. In about a minute and a
half, we'd be dead.
>> Why? Because our cells are using oxygen.
Cyanide blocks energy utilization from
oxygen. The interesting thing like
Warberg and we and others have shown,
cancer cells can survive in cyanide.
That tells us right there, they're not
using the same energy that we're using.
Why is a cancer cell resistant to
cyanide? because it uses a non oxygen-
dependent energy metabolism which is
called fermentation. And the fuels for
that are glucose, the sugar that's
abundant in our bodies and the amino
acid of and of glutamine. So those are
the two fuels that drive energy in
cancer cells.
>> Glutamate come from the ketones?
>> No, glutamine. The amino acid glutamine.
The glutamine is the amino acid. It's
>> and where does it come from?
>> It's in our blood. Our body makes it.
It's the most ab it's called a
non-essential amino acid because we can
get it from the diet and we can also
make it ourselves.
>> So it's it's the most abundant amino
acid. It's essential in many ways, but
they call it a non-essential amino acid
because we can make it from glucose. So
it's something but it's absolutely
essential for a tumor cell. Tumor cells
can't live without that fuel.
>> What dietary product would give you more
of that?
>> Any it's every it's everywhere. Plants,
proteins, it's just every you can't use
diet to target glutamine. Okay,
>> you you can use diet to target glucose,
but you can't use diet to target
glutamine. I've explained that a lot of
people say, "Oh, what can I do?" I mean,
you can do a lot of exercise to lower
glutamine, but it's not going to lower
to the point where you're going to kill
cancer cells.
>> Yeah. Okay.
>> You've got to use a drug. And that's why
we we know these drugs that can do this.
>> Okay. So, we've got the glutamate and
we've got the
>> glutamine, not glutamate.
>> Sorry.
>> Glutamate is another amino acid made
from glutamine.
>> So, glutamine is the key. Glutamine.
Glutamine is metabolized to glutamate
then to another like you said you didn't
want me to get too deep but we have to
know the metabolic pathway that drives
the energy from from sources other than
oxygen and it's glutamine is metabolized
to glutamate which is then metabolized
to a molecule in the car TCA cycle the
KB cycle is alpha ketoglutarate sorry
suinil coa and and that produces
tremendous energy inside the
mitochondria.
>> This is why everybody was confused for
so many decades. Even Warberg, the
mitochondrian is a spaghetti network in
our cytoplasm that generates the massive
amount of energy through oxygen for we
breathe the mitochondria in our cells
makes the ATP so you and I can speak and
think and this kind of thing. So that's
the call the mitochondrian. It's a
organel in the cytoplasm of cells and
the oxygen that's consumed goes to the
mitochondria and it makes very highly
efficient energy and that's was always
thought to be the sole source of energy
in the mitochondria. However, we in
cancer cells, we found out that the
mitochondria can also produce a
tremendous amount of energy with a
fermentation of glutamine, which was
never really understood or even
discovered until we started looking at
it in more detail. And I did this with
my friend and colleague Dr. Christos
Shinopoulos from Seml Weiss University
in Budapest, Hungary. He's the world
leader in the way that mechanism that
that mechanism. So I teamed up with him
because I had a suspicion that the
cancer cells were gaining energy from
inside the mitochondria by a mechanism
that most people don't even know about
or never heard about. And he didn't
know. So he and I got together and he
started looking at this and he said,
"Yeah, these damn cancer cells, they're
sucking down the glutamine and
fermenting it. And this is new. This is
wow. We didn't know this." And a lot of
people in the cancer field know that
glutamine is an essential fuel for
tumors, but they thought it was oxidized
using oxygen. No, it's fermented. So
that's a new concept. Now, I know it's
it might seem complicated to the lay
person and they shouldn't feel they they
shouldn't feel that way because it's
just as uncomp it's just as complicated
and unknown to the oncologist.
So it's that so you can all join
together and learn something new.
Oncologist and lay person should know
that the cancer cells are fermenting an
amino acid to get energy. This is the
detail you you need to know this in
order to develop effective therapies for
cancer because if you don't understand
the biology and biochemistry of the very
disorder you're studying, then the then
the likelihood of developing effective
therapies is going to be far off. And
that's where we are today. We have 1,700
people a day dying from cancer because
essentially they don't understand what I
just said or fa or or or refuse to
accept it. They always come out with
some superficial explanation. Well, you
can't be right because 99% of the people
in the cancer field think it's the
genetic disease
>> and and therefore I can't be right.
>> Okay. So, so getting back to your
fermentation hypothesis. So, you're
saying that cancer cells are getting
energy by this unique uh phenomena of
fermentation. And so what does that now
tell us about how people are getting
cancer and potentially how they could
prevent it?
>> Those are different issues. And don't
forget it's not just amino acid
fermentation. It's glucose fermentation
which every Warberg knew that. That was
the whole thing. They always thought it
was just glucose. We have now know it's
amino acid and glucose fermentation. So
you can't manage cancer if you have
cancer. You must target those two fuels
together at the same time. and
transition the body to ketosis,
nutritional ketosis because the tumor
cell cannot use ketone bodies or fatty
acids to replace glucose and glutamine.
So we now know how to manage cancer. Now
the question you just asked is how do
you prevent cancer is a different issue.
So you have to know how cancer started
in the first place and it cancer starts
by damage to the mitochondria of the
cells in our body. It might strike a
breast cell. It might strike a bladder
cell. It might strike a lung cell, a
brain cell, a colon cell, a skin cell.
Doesn't make any difference. A blood
cell. Whatever damages chronically the
ability of the cell to produce energy
through oxygen, allowing the cell to
transition to fermentation leads to
disregulated cell growth. So the way you
prevent cancer is you keep your
mitochondria healthy. Just like our
paleolithic ancestors, cancer was
unheard of. Who was around then? Nobody
was around. But we have people living
today according to their traditional
ways that they lived by thousands and
thousands of years. And several people
have investigated these primitive
tribes. And cancer is rare, extremely
rare in tribes that exist according to
their traditional ways where they eat
foods that are all natural. They have a
lot of exercise. they're not exposed to
as many carcinogens as other people. So
you find out that in these tribes,
cancer is extremely rare. And then as
soon as the tribe adapts western
cultural diet and lifestyle, they get
cancer, dementia, heart attacks, they
get all the same stuff, diabetes. It's
not a mystery. We know exactly how
cancer starts. We know exactly the diet,
lifestyle issues that all come together,
not just one, the whole spectrum of
things leading to damage to the
respiratory capacity of a cell, allowing
that cell to transition slowly over to
fermentation,
>> from oxygen to fermentation
>> and then just leads to disregulated cell
growth because the organel that controls
the differentiated quiescent state of
the cell is the mitochondrian. And if
that organel becomes corrupted or dis
deficient, the cell falls back on
ancient pathway of proliferation. It's
so simple. I I just find it is wow. How
is nobody ever been able to find out
about this stuff?
>> One question, maybe this will answer the
question that people often just get one
cancer or two. The way you're describing
it, it would suggest that a person could
get multiple cancers because the mito
the mitochondria is being affected in
the breast, in the colon.
It it could be at the origin in a Okay,
a breast could have an oluded milk duct
that would damage uh chronically inflam
chronic inflammation around the oluded
milk duct.
>> Um you could have an irritation in the
bowel uh from a kind of food or or uh
type of lifestyle that would irritate uh
a cell in the in the bowel uh which
would then lead to uh colon cancer. Uh
you could have um uh a bang on the head
or a viral infection that would give you
a brain tumor. Any anything.
>> Are you serious? A bang on the head can
give you colon a brain cancer.
>> A lot of people who have had brain
tumors have had serious head injuries at
one point or another. As a matter of
fact during the second world war the
publishing came out of Germany where
some survivors of battles had shrapnel
wounds in the head and they developed
glyobblasto around the shrapnel room.
That's actually how I started put
producing cancer in in brain cancer in
mice. I was putting shards of chem
chemical carcinogen into the brain of a
mouse and he would develop
glyopblastoomas.
>> So so this is really showing how in
inflammation itself causes metac
mitochondrial disrepair which then can
lead to cancer.
>> Absolutely. Inflammation chronic
inflammation is a precipitatory factor
for damaging oxidative phosphorilation.
Absolutely. This is why you have type
two diabetes. If you look at C reactive
protein in the bloodstream of a person
with diabetes, often not all, many
people have elevated C react, which is a
marker for inflammation. Okay? So, if
I'm systemically inflamed, it could give
me colon cancer, breast cancer if you're
a female, it could give you bladder
cancer, it could give you any kind of it
depends on the genetic architecture of
your tissue being subjected to that
inflammatory insult at a given time at
any given time. So clearly and not only
that intermittent hypoxy if you watch
these guys that have sleep apnea they
stop breathing in the middle of the
night I I couldn't believe a lot of
times it's associated with obesity. So
you put obesity, sleep apnea, diabetes,
you put all that together, man, you are
a powder keg for cancer. And as a matter
of fact, diabetes or obesity is
replacing smoking as one of the great
risk factors. And obesity has in
systemic inflammation, sleep apnea, all
these kinds of things can be associated
with that. And then you put on top of
that microlastics and forever chemicals
in your environment, highly processed
carbohydrate foods. You throw all that
stuff together and boom, you got an
epidemic of cancer. It's not surprising.
>> You know exactly what's going on.
>> So, you just mentioned ultrarocessed
food. Can you be specific about how that
can cause um cancer ultimately?
>> It contributes to systemic inflammation.
You're eating foods that have no
nutritional value. They're not helping
our normal cells at all. So, all you're
doing is contributing to systemic
inflammation and high blood sugar levels
and damage to the body. Okay. And this
then we also know virus infections. You
get v hepatit papilloma virus, hepatitis
C viruses. We showed clearly how those
viruses enter the mitochondria or the
products causing disrupt disruption of
oxidative metabolism leading to
fermentation. And and we put all the
parts together and we know exactly you
can't it's very hard to get cancer if
you keep your mitochondria healthy. How
do you keep your mitochondria healthy?
Do a hell of a lot of exercise every
day. Don't eat highly processed
carbohydrates. keep your blood sugars
low and your ketones elevated just like
our paleolithic ancestors did. And then
people say, "I don't want to do that." I
[laughter] said, "Okay, I told you what
you needed to do. Skip skip skip meals.
Do a lot of exercise." And you reduce
your risk. All it is is reducing risk.
It's not pre it's not causing it's not
saying I can never get can it's hard to
get cancer if your mitochondria healthy.
Let's put it
>> ultrarocessed food. Would it be fair to
say that ultrarocessed food and sugar
are actually carcinogenic? Like is that
an accurate statement?
>> No, that's not accurate. So that's not
accurate. Sugar is not a carcinogen and
nor is highly processed carbohydrates
are are are um carcin they're not
carcinogens. Uh but they can create a a
systemic inflammation in the body which
can chronically damage oxidative
phosphorilation. But to say that sugar
or highly processed food is a
carcinogen, that's not right. That's not
right. How is that not right? I can see
that tobacco is a carcinogen.
>> Yeah, because there's you have molecules
in tobacco that actually specifically
damage oxidative phosphorilation. You
have and I showed this in my book. All
these different kinds of carcinogens
that we hear about tetrahydrochloride,
urethane, all of these things actually
chronically specifically disrupt
oxidative phosphorilation. Sugar doesn't
do this. Now, if you have cancer, that's
a different issue. If you have cancer,
the level of sugar in the blood will be
provocative towards driving the
disregulated growth of that cancer. And
there's dozens and dozens of our we were
the first ones to show the linkage
between blood sugar and how fast the
tumor could grow. In our pre-clinical
models of glyopblasto, the higher the
blood sugar, the faster the tumor grows.
The lower the blood sugar, the slower
the tumor grows. And this was shown for
breast cancer, bladder cancer, colon
cancer, all these different cancers. So
if you want your cancer to grow fast,
you got to get your blood sugar as high
as possible,
>> right? So So is it fair to say that
cancer or sugar feeds cancer?
>> Yes. That's it's actually glucose. So
sugar, table sugar, sucrose, which is
fructose and glucose together, but the
glucose molecule Yes.
>> is an absolute fuel for driving the
fermentation metabolism in the cytoplasm
of the tumor. Yes. Yes. And it's been
shown over and over again. Uh people who
have high blood sugar and they have a
metastatic cancer, they don't live long.
They don't live long. You got to keep
the blood sugar down. And you got to
target the glutamine. The way you kill
cancer is you got to target the glucose
and glutamine together while
transitioning the body over to
nutritional ketosis. Yeah.
>> Then then you have a fighting chance.
You you have a chance to potentially
live a lot longer than you would. Now
that doesn't mean you throw out
imunotherapies and toxic radiation and
all these other things. You can
certainly use those, but you use them
more strategically than the way we are
using them today. We're using them as
the upfront form of managing cancer.
When you ca view cancer as a
mitochondrial metabolic disease, you
shrink the tumor first, you take away
the inflammation, you make the rest of
the body super healthy, and then you get
the patient into a state of management,
and then you can come in with some of
the traditional radiation, chemo, and
this kind of thing as a finishing off
process. So, it's kind of like you
you're a nutritional oncologist first.
>> Yeah, you certainly need to know that if
you really want to be successful in
managing cancer, you really need to
know. Yes, the nutrition is we're not
didn't do a lot of work on on on the
value of nutrition as much as I do on
using food as medicine to to to target
the availability of the glucose and
glutamine. But all of this should of
course be done under a nutritional
paradigm that maintains normal macro and
micronutrients so you don't harm or put
the patient at risk. Don't forget people
say, "Oh, I got to take all these
vitamins." The damn tumor cells need
those vitamins, too. So, just remember
that. [laughter]
>> So, they can't. So, let's not make their
life any more comfortable than it has to
be.
>> Well, okay. So, you were suggesting keto
or restricted diets. Is it the keto or
is it the restricted calories?
>> It's both.
>> Okay.
>> It's both. And that's why we developed
the glucose ketone index calculator. We
published this based on how human beings
were responding to metabolic therapy. It
became clear to me more than 10 years
ago that we were working with a young
woman from France, an American lawyer
who happened to live in France, and we
were having her manage her blood sugar
and glucone bodies independently of each
other. And it was a real challenge. It
caused her to have a lot of stress. She
got into an argument with she had a
handicap parking spot uh because she was
suffering from a type of brain tumor uh
brain stem kind of tumor and she had a
cane and she was man monitoring with
various meters, a sugar meter and a
ketone meter independently of each
other. She got into a fight with the guy
who took her handicap parking spot. And
then she did measured her blood sugar
and it was really high, super high, like
up 150 milligram per deciliter for
someone without diabetes. That would be
a spike. And she said, "Oh, my cancer is
going to grow." And I said, "What's your
ketones?" And she said, "Oh, no, it's a
2 millmer." I said, "Wow, that's still
pretty high." So I told my student Josh
Maidenbower, I said, "We got to figure a
way to make these people not so freaked
out." And we developed a ratio of of
glucose to ketones in the blood. So you
can take like a keto mojo meter. You can
take a prick a blood drop of blood like
a diabetic would and you use the glucose
stick and you get a glucose reading and
then you can take the ketone stick and
get a ketone reading. Push the button
and it gives you a ratio and called the
glucose ketone index. And if you keep an
index about 2.0 or below, uh you're
putting a hell of a lot of metabolic
pressure on these tumor cells. And then
you come in with strategic drugs to
target the glutamine. Once the patient
is in in into a nutritional ketoic
state, the tumor cells are being
hammered metabolically. Uh they're not
growing very fast and the the
inflammation is shr being shrunk up and
they're starting to the bo the body is
starting to make adjustments to this.
They're fighting the tumors.
>> Possible to actually regress cancer just
through this kind of nutritional
approach.
>> Oh, absolutely. But it doesn't happen to
everybody. So you can't some people I'm
shocked I we've never been able to
provide long-term management for our
pre-clinical models using uh keto alone.
Um we always have to target the
glutamine together with the keto and
when you do that you get much better
results. The outcome is much better. So
so that's why you know people always
want a cure for cancer. My view is what
the hell is wrong with long-term
management? Why you always have to feel
you're going to be cured? Because a lot
of pe 1700 people are dying a day here.
They're not being cured, right?
>> But what wouldn't it be great if we
could keep those 1700 people a day
living or 10 times longer than they
would, but maybe in the in 10 or 20
years they die or from something?
>> Isn't there Isn't there also a a thought
that all of us have some level of
cancer, but our immune system is
suppressing it and that a good
nutritional
approach would suppress that?
>> Yeah, maybe. I don't know. They say that
we we don't look at that kind of stuff.
We're we're into two things. Can you
prevent cancer? And if you got it, how
you going to how you going to manage it,
right?
>> Um so usually people that are in like as
I said, if you're in nutritional ketosis
and you're super active all the time,
it's going to be extremely difficult to
get cancer in the first place. Whether
you have some immune everything in your
body is working now very healthy. That's
how we evolved over hundreds of
thousands of years as hunter gatherers.
So we were survivor
>> suggesting we have a chronic approach to
it.
Yeah, that's who we are. We have to
always go back and look at our past. We
just didn't appear on the planet 6,000
years ago. We we've been on we we've
been a species for about a million
years. And in that time up until the
Neolithic period about 10,000 years ago,
we were hunter gatherers. We had a lot
of exercise. What was killing us then?
It was injuries and infections. We
didn't have antibiotics or orthopedic
surgeons. Now we have antibiotics and
orthopedic surgeons and we can get rid
of a lot of the things that would have
killed us during the Paleolithic period.
And now we're dying from dementia,
cancer, cardiovascular dis. We've
replaced those other forms of death by
chronic forms of death. And that's what
we have an epidemic of chronic diseases
in this country and the world that do
these kinds of diets. Our food sources
are being produced in far away countries
and they're being shipped. The tomato
doesn't go bad for six months on a
shelf. Are you kidding me? These are all
engineered things and we're eating these
things. We're sitting in traffic. We're
all freaked out. We can't sleep at
night. All of a sudden you get cancer,
dementia, get some other thing is it's
our diet and lifestyle that's putting us
at risk for these. But who wants to go
back and live like a Neanderthal in a
cave, your neighbor's dog and stuff like
this, right?
>> A lot of us have heard about the
mitochondrial and metabolic interplay
with Chris Palmer's work. Would you say
that you're along the same lines as him?
He talks about psychiatry and you're
talking about oncology, but is it the
same kind of thinking?
>> Yes, very similar. I know Chris, we we
had a meeting together not long ago at
the Broken Science Initiative, but yeah,
he's managing neurossychiatric
depression and these kinds of disorders
by putting people into ketosis and
essentially it's a mitochondrial problem
in the brain.
>> So very interesting like when you have
Parkinson's disease, it's a
mitochondrial damage, but the damage
when and neurons can't adapt to
switching from respiration to a
fermentation. So the cells essentially
die. So this in Parkinson's disease
you're getting the death sub neurons in
substantia which is a part of the
brain that controls motor coordination
and things like this. So you can keep
those neurons alive a little bit. You
give them L-dopa and certain things like
this. But essentially if you can keep
the mitochondria healthy by increasing
the utilization of ketones together
again with certain drugs you could
possibly extend uh survival even longer.
But neurons can't switch, can't
upregulate, keep can't transition from
oxidative phosphorilation to
fermentation. They're not equipped to do
that. So many neurons die. That's why
you rarely get cancer from neurons in
the brain
>> or from cardiac myioytes. Cancer in the
brain comes from gleal cells which can
switch to fermentation. Uh uh cardiac
myioytes in our heart that are beating
all the time uh cannot switch to a
fermentation metabolism. So you rarely
if ever get cancer in cardiac meioytes.
When you understand the biology of the
organs and the cells in our body, you
can clearly explain why some cells get
cancer and other cells don't. And
because some can ferment and some can't.
If you can't ferment, you can't become a
cancer cell. You got to
>> that's the kind of cancer that George
Harrison had was a glyobblastoma. Then
>> I don't know George the Beetle, the guy
from the Beatles. I don't know what he
died from. Senator John McCain died from
glyobblasto. So did President Biden's
son Bo Biden and Teddy Kennedy from
Massachusetts here. They they all have
glyobblasto because it's being
mistreated. It's not being treated as a
metabolic disease. And we published a
paper showing that one of the standard
treatments for glyopblasto is radiation.
And I told them for decades I said this
frees up massive amounts of glucose and
glutamine in the tumor micro environment
>> and that leads to the rapid death of
these poor people. They didn't believe
me. And I said, "Look at all the people
dying." And we just came out with a
paper from our Greek colleagues,
Athanasis, even Julio and Colors. And
they treated a clinical treatment
protocol for GBM patients. And the one
glyobblasto patient and the ones that
took stayed adherent to the ketogenic
metabolic therapy lived 60 beyond three
years 60 68% whereas those who didn't
was only 6%. So clearly this is just the
beginning. We're going to manage these
cancers really effectively. The problem
is the field is not trained to know what
I'm saying. They still think cancer is a
genetic disease. And as long as they
think that some of them don't even think
they when you ask them what theory are
you working under what they even say
what are you talking about a theory man
you got to understand evolutionary
biology you got to understand what the
theory is that you're working under. If
the theory is not consistent with with
the with the disorder then the outcome
is never going to be optimal. Again it
has to be people need to be trained. And
the other thing too is is the patients
themselves better start knowing what the
hell is going on. You can't be a
functional illiterate when you have
cancer. You really got to know what's
going on. And you can't entrust your
sacred soul to someone who has no clue
about the uh underlying theory that
drives the that drives their practice.
>> I want to ask you uh about weight loss,
weight loss cancer. How does that play
into this? The cexi is the tumor cells
taking the muscle amino acids out of the
muscle.
>> Okay.
>> Some of the amino acids will go to the
liver and turn it into glucose. And of
course glutamine itself can be a driving
fuel for the tumor. And you're and
that's the because why that happens is
because the metastatic cell which
ultimately is um causing the cexia. It
happens with metastasis. We have clearly
shown that all metastatic cancers are
macrofagages which are part of our
immune system. This is another reason
why a lot of these imunotherapies won't
work because the very cells that are are
part of the immune system. They're
imunosuppressive. They they have a lot
of we we understand most of what's going
on with the cancer. It's just that I'm
frustrated by the fact that no one else
seems to be able to understand it
[laughter] and not even be able to apply
it in the clinics.
>> Okay.
>> But but but you're right, the cexia
weight loss. So you have two different
kinds of weight loss. If you go on water
only fasting and you do therapeutic
fasting, that's called therapeutic
weight loss. You're losing the weight
because you are not eating and your body
is getting healthier and healthier with
a transition over to ketones. Whereas,
if you're losing weight because of
cexia, that's a very different that's a
pathological weight loss. This is not a
normal healthy weight loss. It's
pathological. But once you kill those
tumor cells, you're going to be able to
body's going to be able to recover
itself and then regain the weight that
you lost. But you got to kill the tumor
cells first and then you can get regain
the weight.
>> Okay. Getting back to treatment then
clearly ketogenic diets and therapeutic
fasting are the way to go. What about
somebody who wants to follow a
plant-based diet? Is that possible to
do?
>> Yeah, certainly possible. They just have
to measure their glucose ketone index.
Much more difficult to get into the low
GKI range on a plant-based diet than it
is on a carnivore diet. But you can do
it. So it's not like it can't be done.
You might have to do more water only
fasting if you're plant uh based. We
that's one of the things we're in the
process of doing it. You have to have
diets like our friends had a met a
calorierestricted Mediterranean diet,
calorierestricted carnivore diet,
calorierestricted plant-based diet. Uh
all of these diets have to be tailored
for gender differences, age differences,
cultural differences, religious
differences. Uh all of these things have
to be dovetailed into whatever group you
want to call yourself. And then you
simply need to know the challenges and
strategies to bring your bo you're
bringing your blood sugar down and your
ketones up regardless of what kind of
diet you have.
>> It sounds to me like dietary oncology is
a niche that needs to be filled.
>> Oh, absolutely. If you want to live you
want to live in a higher quality of
life, if you don't want to live and you
want to be miserable, then you don't
want to do what I'm saying. But if you
want to live, I think most people are
say yes. But the problem is they go to
their oncologist and they get slapped
down. Many oncologists say, "We never
heard of this. Glucose has nothing to do
with cancer." So you're up against a
wall of lack of knowledge. There's a
massive lack of knowledge on the biology
of the very disease that's being
treated. How are we going to change
that? We have to go back into the
medical schools and we have to train the
physicians to know that food can be
medicine. And you need to know how food
and drugs work together synergistically
to manage these various diseases. And
we're not getting that at all.
>> Well, you've written a book. You you've
done multiple peer-reviewed articles.
What else can you do? Are you getting
any push back from traditional oncology?
So we do get some push back only because
whenever you do anything that's changed
that requires change people always get
you're changing an entire paradigm how
cancer was viewed and how it can be
treated and prevented which is not part
of the mainstream textbooks of biology
biochemistry it's not part of what we
train physicians in medical schools the
pharmaceutical companies uh the hospital
systems the academic industry national
cancer institute NCI says on their web
page cancer is a genetic disease.
Clearly, they're they're not up to date
with what's going on. The pharmaceutical
companies are building imunotherapies
and all these things based on an
incorrect theory. The hospitals are
making massive amounts of revenue from
drugs and radiation that generate
revenue. And the poor patient just is
being led around.
>> Yeah. Not knowing what the hell is going
on.
>> But do you have any hope that's going to
change? Like you've published, you're
speaking out.
>> Yeah. People want to live, it'll change.
[laughter] It's the bottom line. It's
not going to come from the top. It's
going to come from the bottom. Once
people need to know this, they're going
to have to put the pressure because the
guy, what do you think? The guys at the
top medical schools are going to say,
"Do a water only fast. The manager
can't." They're going to say that.
>> So, unless the people, unless they are
told when somebody tells them, here's
the evidence, you run the clinical
trial, you tell me what you find. All
right? And then they say, and then
they've had some trials that have been
out there, but they did it the wrong
way. They weren't restricting. They
didn't know what they were doing. And
and that's why people say, "I don't
believe you until you do a clinical
trial." And I said, "You got to have
people knowing how to run a clinical
trial to do this stuff. Otherwise,
you're going to get misinformation and
you're going to get incorrect
results." And our trial that we did with
the Greeks just recently, just published
a month ago, clearly showed because I
know a one of the authors on that paper.
He's a friend and I he worked with me in
the epilepsy field for years, so I know
he knows what he's talking about. And
they got good results. But then you take
other trials where they have no clue
what they're doing and they let the
cancer patient eat tubs of lard and and
no exercise and oh it didn't work. Man,
it wouldn't work. [laughter] It didn't
work because you didn't do it the right
way. It'd be just like somebody who
knows who's trained to use radiation
therapy. They're trained to know how to
treat a tumor with radiation in the
brain or whatever so smoke doesn't come
out of your ears. Okay, for crying out
loud. He's been trained to do that. He
knows what he's supposed to do. So, if
you take somebody who doesn't understand
metabolic therapy and you have them do
this, it's not going to work. Again,
it's all training and it's all based on
hard science. This is not some voodoo
witch doctor stuff. This is all
supported by by by by legitimate
science.
>> If everybody were to uh eat keto or we
somehow got a population shift, would we
actually see cancer prevalence drop?
>> I don't want to say eat keto. All I
would want to say is can you get your
blood sugar down and your and your
ketones elevated? You can do that with
water only fasting, exercise, or eating
foods that are low in in carbohydrates.
>> Okay? Just eat low carbohydrate foods, a
lot of exercise, skip meals, get
yourself back into how we were during
the Paleolithic period. And yes, you're
going to drop cancer death rates. No
question about it. It's just that people
don't do that. We're sitting in traffic.
We We have tremendous stress sitting in
front of cell phones all day long.
People getting all freaked out, right?
They don't sleep at night. They have bad
food. They're not happy. Sitting in
traffic, no exercise. We got an obesity
epidemic.
>> Is the obese is it obesity itself that's
also feeding the cancer or is it that
metabolic disease that led to obesity
and cancer? Can obesity in itself be a
risk factor?
>> Obesity is what we see.
>> Yeah.
>> Okay. When you look at the blood when
you look at the bloodstream of the obese
person,
>> yeah, they're most likely
>> you also often time not all obese
people. I don't want to like label
everybody who's obese as like going to
get cancer. The the issue is that many
obese people also have type two
diabetes.
>> Okay.
>> They also have it's a con it's a
constellation
of different provocative factors that go
together.
>> So you have microlastics, you have
forever chemicals, you have no exercise,
you're obese, you have high in diabetes,
you got all these things together and
therefore then you get cancer. Okay, not
surprising. What would you tell somebody
who just got cancer? What would you
advise them?
>> I'm not a physician.
>> Yeah.
>> I can't advise them to do anything.
Otherwise, I'm practicing medicine
without a license.
>> All right. I'm the physician and I'm
calling you for advice.
>> Yeah. I tell them I I give them
information. The papers that we've
published, we in fact, we've just
published a really big paper on managing
glyobblasto with 20 over 20 authors, MDs
and PhDs and and nutritionists and
dieticians. that were all on this one
paper and it spells out in a very clear
way what you can what are the options
that you have to manage your cancer. Now
it was for glyopblasto but it could work
for all these cancers even blood cancers
because they're all have they all have
the same problem. All cancers are
dependent on a fermentation metabolism
and they cannot generate energy through
efficient energy through oxidative
phosphorilation. They're all dependent
on glucose and glutamine and they can't
burn fatty acids or ketone bodies. That
tells you right there you have to go and
work with a knowledgeable physician.
Read the information in the paper. Both
the patient and the physician are a team
and they work together and they feed off
of each other and because this is a work
in progress. Metabolic therapy is in its
infancy. It will become the standard of
care at some point in the future. I
don't know when that point will be, but
eventually we cannot continue to do what
we are doing today. Uh otherwise, we're
gonna we're gonna have two or three
thousand people uh uh a day dying from
these things. We better figure out
what's happening real quick. Otherwise,
we're headed for a much worse situation.
>> So, you are optimistic that your your
view will be adopted because there are
papers being published, but it's a
question of how soon that will happen.
>> Yeah. Yeah. When the National Cancer
Institute says cancer is a genetic
disease and everybody's research grants
are based on that, it's not going to
happen anytime soon, you really have to
change the entire perspective of what
how we deal with cancer. But also when
what we have seen which is very
interesting is that we have some people
contact me they have like prostate
cancer or whatever and then they go on
metabolic therapy but they also were
obese type 2 diabetes hypertension high
blood pressure besides having cancer and
they go on metabolic therapy and all of
a sudden cancer becomes managed diabetes
goes away high blood pressure goes away
hypertension goes away all these things
go away because you're bringing your
body back into a new state of metabolic
homeostasis. You mean to tell me just
doing a lot of exercise and eating the
right way and taking a few drugs to
target the glutamine can do all this?
The answer is yes. How come nobody knows
about that?
>> Aside from uh nutritional um uh advice
that you might suggest, is there any
medications uh on your end that you're
interested in to see?
>> Yes. Yes. We're very interested in
parasite medications and we're seeing
starting to see tremendous therapeutic
success with some parasite medications
especially when the body is in
nutritional ketosis.
>> You mean like Ivormectin?
>> Uh we haven't tried ivormectin yet but
I've tried fenbendazol and mbmendazol.
These are group of parasite medications.
>> How would that possibly be helpful?
because the the parasite and the cancer
cell are using the same metabolic
pathway to stay alive.
>> Okay,
>> it's not that complicated either. When
you look at what a par how does a
parasite stay alive in your body? It's
using the same fermentation pathway that
the tumor cell uses.
>> So when you put your body into
nutritional ketosis and hit them with a
a simple parasite medication. Now here's
the interesting thing. Mendazol here we
got to love our society. Mendazol is
cheap as hell. 50 cents a tablet over in
India and it was a par it's one of these
deworming parasites. Soon as they
realized in this country that embendazol
has some therapeutic benefit against
cancer. It's now like $600 a tablet. So
this is despicable. These people are
immoral. You know what immorality is?
When you're immoral, this is the kind of
stuff you do, right? So if you're that
kind of a person that would take a 50
cent tablet, this is the way. Remember
that guy, what was his name? Martin
Scarelli. He took the epipens and made a
fortune on it only because he could.
>> But it doesn't just because you could do
it doesn't mean it's moral.
>> So you got to deal with the immorality
issue.
>> Okay, good. We're at the end of our time
and and I I I want to thank you so much
for all of your information. What is
next for you?
>> Next for us is to find a tumor cell that
does not require glucose and glutamine.
is are there any tumor cells out there
that can grow in a disregulated way and
not be able to use the glucose, sugar,
and the amino acid? And so far, we
haven't found one. So, I have a $100
bill that I give to that I'll give to my
students every year. I have this $100
bill. I said, "You find me a tumor that
can grow without glucose and glutamine.
I'll give you the $100 bill." And so
far, I haven't lost it in five years.
That's our hunt. So if every if we can't
find a tumor that can that that doesn't
use glucose and glutamine, then we would
have to change the paradigm. But right
now, the fact that we can't find anybody
maybe says we're right.
>> Yeah,
>> maybe we're right.
>> I think it's a simple metabolic disease.
Get over it. It's not that complicated.
We always have a a final question to ask
and that would be if you could tell a
younger version of yourself something
about what you've learned about cancer
or about this metabolic perspective what
would it be? That's a hard question
because everything is time and date. Uh,
and 10, 20, 30 years ago, cancer was
deep into the idea that it was
definitely genetic. And all the
excitement and no matter what I would
have been able to say then
>> wouldn't have made any difference
because I'm saying it now because we
have now come to know that none of that
stuff is working well. We had to play
let the whole thing play out to say,
"Okay, I've had 30 years of doing this
genetic stuff and we have more people
dying a day today than we've ever had.
Do you think we might want to revisit?"
>> Yeah.
>> But if I had done it 30 years ago, the
whole field was locked into this genetic
thing and anybody who thought
differently was thrown under the bus
just like Otto Warberg. So you have to
put everything in time. It's the way the
whole the whole ideas and concepts
evolve over time before it begins to
make sense. So, I don't know. 20 years
ago, I would have been yelling into the
wind, but now we know we have a lot more
scientific evidence to support what I'm
saying. Yeah,
>> that makes it a rational approach for
sure.
>> Yeah, that's great. Thank you so much
for your time and explaining all of